hello everyone um all right let me just
get this started I'm gonna let since
we're an organization of the moving
image I'm going to let the moving image
do the introduction for what new
frontier is for years we had a division
of Sundays we were just showing the
technology on the other side was the art
itself this is enormous emergence of
technology and how it was changing the
moving image we saw the beginning of an
explosion of artists working in
different forms of media and created
this fully immersive cinematic venue at
an experiment of sorts there are new
forms of storytelling we're on this path
and we're not quite sure where it's
taking us we really need a place artists
and filmmakers who want to just
completely take a risk try something
absolutely new
our job and our role is to create a
space and a platform to bring new voices
new ways of seeing the world to this
place a new media landscape was really
changing how works are being made how
was it being shown how works were even
playing a role in society
changing their technologies the
technology becomes more capable of
delivering the work you imagine and what
you see is a sense of wonder you see
wonder
you
this year it's much more sculptural much
more engaging with the body telling
stories that are completely divergent
from the traditional proscenium formats
the artists who are breaking boundaries
are the artists who don't even know what
it is they're doing but they're doing it
for those of you who don't know we also
have for the past two years a lab
dedicated to new frontier work now we
could bring this incredible community of
artists working in so many different
disciplines and creative practices where
they could push the boundaries of their
work and of storytelling our sense of
discovery our sense of independent
expression our sense of curiosity this
is what the artists bring to this
environment
over the last 10 years we've got this
explosion of platforms for this adoption
of transmedia by master storytellers
this is a moment in time that never
existed before
we've been part of the technology trail
for over 25 years it's been interesting
to see how things had evolved ocular
evolution is a week in the ability of
storytellers to bring the viewer inside
the frame of the story world it's a
brave new world so be brave take a shot
it's out there for you to grab the
possibilities pushing the boundaries
we're just at the edge of the next
frontier let's see what happens let's
see where the artist
so that gives you a sense of what of
what new frontier has been over the last
ten years and I want to talk a little
bit about where we're trying to go over
the next ten years and I have to say
that it's a real interesting position
have to follow Aaron Copland because he
was actually one of my mentors when I
came to the lab as an artist in 2011 at
the new frontier story lab and and just
have he's actually been one of the key
artist that had been pioneering this
path of the intersection of art and
technology and storytelling and
technology in such a phenomenal way that
he's our poster child for new frontier
so to follow you is a great honor I'm
happy to still be in the space that you
kind of helped usher me into so many
years ago and so I want to talk to you a
little bit about how new frontier and
I'd have to say that Shari free low is
the founder of new frontier and the
chief curator and she's not here today
because she's setting up for an
exhibition at the moment that's
happening on Monday called slithering
screens and films that slither off the
screens and I just don't talk a little
bit about how we think about our
curatorial practice right so we
understand that story story only exists
within a communication architecture
Tabitha Jackson who's the head of our
documentary film program says that story
does not exist until it has been heard
so there is something that we all
understand about whether the oral
storytelling or something as complex as
the things that we're seeing now with VR
and augmented reality and transmedia
storytelling there's this need to
transfer my emotions my thoughts my
images my imagination through some
medium to another person and so at new
frontier were following the evolution of
that communication architecture
particularly following the artists as
they hack into it as they remix it and
totally kind of appropriated to do that
thing of transferring their emotions
their heart their story their their
their their their creation whatever's in
their head and having it go through that
transference process into somebody
else's mind heart soul however you want
to define it and so if we know that
story exists in that kind of
communication architecture you know
where where has where how is that
communications architecture evolved over
the last 10 years how will it evolved
over the next 10 years is a key part of
our daily questions at new frontier and
also how our artists utilizing that
architecture to not only replicate how
stories were told on previous platforms
are in previous mediums but how are they
really finding out what is truly native
about that medium and what stories need
to be told on that medium because not
all of the stories do sometimes a
traditional book or using a pen and pen
and paper is this is the best medium for
a particular story or a way of
transferring that imagination to another
person and so we're constantly having to
ask those questions so that we get past
the whiz-bang and the gizmos and you
know all the things that are kind of at
the hype of this innovation space and
find out where the soul is in that
machine and what really kind of gives us
those meaning foam resin and experiences
and so just over that I'm just going to
do a kind of a brief overview of what we
have been seeing in our job of following
these artists into this brave new world
into this unknown space we've seen
transmedia storytelling obviously has
been happening for a long time over a
decade and watching how artists are
constantly trying to understand how a
particular character or story can live
over multiple platforms and can
communicate with us in different ways on
those platforms in a specific way to
enhance the overarching purpose of that
piece we're seeing a lot of
omnidirectional storytelling the idea of
getting away from the linear narrative
the three-act structure going from what
I call looking at story like a horizon
to being out in outer space where you
have just absolutely absolute freedom in
terms of your orientation and the way
that you navigate that it's
interestingly touchable media even
though we're getting into screen 'less
you know kind of technologies touchable
media still has this incredible effect
on the
human being when they're engaged in in
that in this kind of art form this
particular piece we had a number of
years ago where Lynette Woolworth the
artist interviewed I think it was
something like 10 women that had been
through some of the worst atrocities
that a human being could go through
whether it be genocide rape war and she
had their stories written down in a book
so you walk into a gallery space and you
actually turn the pages of this text
Facebook and you read their stories and
so a lot of your own imagination becomes
part of that that point of understanding
or understanding that transference and
then you walk up to a blank screen you
put your hand on it and that woman walks
out of the darkness and puts her hand on
your hand and this had such a profound
effect so they're still seeing that
there there is something important about
how our bodies physically relate to this
media we've seen participatory
storytelling in the case of we launched
hit record and help them to support them
over their different iterations and they
have 500,000 people participating in a
co-creation process and you know as Erin
talked about earlier the Johnny Cash
project we still hold up as a as one of
the classics and figuring out what are
the right constraints around the kind of
all of the different options that an
interactive story telling kind of
experience can have to constrain it
enough so that you have over two million
people participate in the same creation
process and nobody fails you don't have
that degradation of the art form
everything remains at that that's that
place that really touches your heart and
resonates and that's what's so exciting
about the new French air spaces we're
trying to follow those artists that are
finding the best practices and finding
the language that will will help us
understand what the the best form is for
those made those mediums we feel fine
data visualization database storytelling
how do you you know sort through the
billions of terabytes of data that are
being generated by humanity to their
devices and understand what is human
about us what is a perspective on
humanity that no one perspective in
storytelling perspective is everything
how can that data that we're gen
reading as an organism called humanity
how can it tell us something about
ourselves that we may not be able to
understand as an individual within that
kind of mass and so it's really
interesting to see how artists are
trying to frame that in a way are trying
to create a process for us to understand
that human story physical cinema you
know gestural based stuff stuff that is
something that's super functional like
what we had with tamper John dr. John
undercuffler who actually imagined
Minority Report technology then decided
to try to bring it into reality and then
to see that evolve into something as
beautiful as Chris milks treachery of
sanctuary where you're actually turning
that idea of a gestural based
relationship with a body and a screen in
the moving image into poetry into this
sense of liberation to the sense of kind
of connectivity that actually makes you
feel more human than then otherwise you
know we're also looking at those artists
that are doing the co-creation with the
algorithm and trying to understand how
does those beginnings of a I start to
fit into the creative process and what
is that mean ethically what does that
mean you know so I was really pleased
with the presentation earlier to see how
you're thinking about it um you know
trying to understand where you know
where the beginning in the end happens
with between the human and the Machine
cinematic interactive cinematic
languages are starting to evolve that
are becoming more seamless that idea of
branching narrative is not becoming this
choose your own adventure where you
start to kind of have to make a choice
that takes you out of the story and out
of the experience but actually allows
you to feel deeper engaged with that
we're seeing this is the same kind of
idea with the last hijack which won an
interactive a me following Somalian
pirate through his decision making about
whether to continue in that in that
field in that career or not um
geo-located storytelling has been a
really interesting area of exploration
this is the silent history which was a
beautiful beautifully written novel
where you get to co-create with the
editor as you traverse certain parts of
the country Grand Central Station in
different areas
and when you're in that spot you start
to see how the story unfolds with the
landscape or the architecture that's
there and then you get to actually
contribute & Co create and edit and
start to create geo specific geocache
content that it kind of extends that
story even works that we didn't get to
curate ourselves but we were really
enamored with such as National Mall
where you're seeing a Geo specific geo
aware musical composition where as you
navigate around this space you start to
hear different versions of how this one
song this one composition can take can
manifest I think one of my own of our
dear friends chris holmes who had done a
parallel composition had to create 400
different strands of one single song to
create that kind of interactivity in
music and composition and something that
we're really interested in I think we're
still very much at the beginning of is
how to story exists in the world of
connected objects in the world of smart
objects I think this piece by Vincent
Morissette was a really interesting kind
of glimpse into what that looks like
when your cell phone was able to kind of
manipulate the lights in the manipulate
the image in the music video that arcade
fire did and then to have your image
jump into the laptop that you're
watching it on and have the protagonist
jump into your cell phone the idea of as
smart objects and screens and all that
stuff starts to proliferate with AR and
VR how will characters live in our world
with us how will we have hamlet in our
pocket for you know over days and how a
hamlet live within the architecture
around us in the environmental the end
the objects around us another example
was Lance wheelers like aware kids from
around the world interacted with a smart
toy and were able to create stories and
and had kind of helped him guide him on
this narrative we're interested in data
visualization real-time analytics we're
interested in bio responsive technology
how the heck is that going to work right
so in this piece by you two doing is he
wanted to recreate that sense of what a
performer has
the state that a performer has to be and
when they go on to stage which is really
common centered while they're dealing
with all the stimulant lights and sounds
and all of this and so he created a
contraption where when you you put on
the you know EEG machine or whatever it
is on your head and as your body goes
into a state of calm into a state of
what i like to say is then your body
rises in the air and then the
stimulation starts to happen and you
start to get lights and sounds and and
ticker tapes but you have to maintain
that inner you no sense of calm in order
to stay in that state so how is that
kind of idea going to start to play into
the story experiences in crafting story
architecture recently I heard about the
VR experience at CES where they actually
did intravenous they gave you serotonin
and and those kinds of did you guys hear
about this or you're in a VR experience
and they're actually manipulating your
own chemicals in your body to get you to
a certain place that's also where you
got some ethical lines that were trying
to manage and then of course this idea
of virtual reality and altered body
experiences this piece by birdly which
Swiss and X brought to Sundance was
incredibly powerful I think as a first
glimpse at what does it mean to to have
that altered body experience how to we
really lose sense of our own gravity and
our own physical relationship with the
world and embody that of a bird this was
we had a 10 hour wait at Sundance
because it was such a compelling
experience and then the idea of as
light-filled technology emerges what
does it mean to walk into the moving
image to walk into went to have the same
kind of agility in inside of a captured
picture that you would inside of a
rendered environment obviously we all
have seen what I you know the promise of
augmented reality and the future of
computing platforms in the future of
communication that will come with that
kind of these new kinds of tools and
we're really excited to support artists
as they're trying to figure out what
does that mean for story and what does
that mean for story architecture
so we definitely believe that we're
always going to be in this diverse media
landscape whether you have vintage media
like books and the like all the way up
to things that are as amazing as Aaron
Koblin slight echo and we're also going
to have to contend with this idea of
what does it mean to be a cyborg what
does it mean to actually integrate all
this technology and your body in the end
side of the architecture of a story and
what does it mean to be superhuman right
so I'm sure you guys are familiar with
with Neil he's an official cyborg and
when I had a conversation with him and I
found out about how he perceives having
worn this contraption on his head for
over ten years and and how it allows a
colorblind person to kind of hear color
because it makes these different sounds
when it interacts with different colors
and how he described this sense of being
superhuman and knowing that already with
my iPhone I feel super human so how is
that feeling going to evolve as we enter
into you know things like you know the
augmented reality headsets that are
coming out and how an hour when the
Smart Objects start to proliferate in
our since our ability as a human being
to have a hyper awareness increases and
how does and what does that mean for the
storyteller whose job is to kind of
ground us in the sense of emotion and
what it means to be human and then
interestingly this was a project that we
didn't support i think it was at tribeca
but this also we're trying to understand
what does it mean to have this mediated
relationship through a machine to find
your own human your own humanity and
this in this project these robots were
released in festivals and you know the
the footage that these robots they did
these interviews with people and the
footage that they caught was in some
ways more vulnerable and more revealing
about the inner life of the people that
were participating then a lot of
documentary filmmakers could get in a
lifetime of capturing interviews on
video so we're so maybe maybe it's not
just that it'll take away our humanity
this idea of you know turning
to a world of artificial intelligence
and machines but maybe there is a way of
designing that future that is human
centered and actually makes us feel more
human so obviously there's a lot of
money being invested in all of this and
and so why is Sundance here well at the
very core our mission is to support the
artist and to follow the artist as they
kind of navigate these new aspects of
the communication architecture to tell
story but fundamentally I think it's
even deeper than that I think it's
deeper than just seeing how they use the
technologies that are emerging I think
that it is critical that artists are
actually at the center of the
technological shift that they are
designing our future along with the
engineers and the nba's because that is
how I think we'll have the best chance
of having you know a society that
addresses some of the concerns that had
come up earlier today that Aaron was
talking about about those things that
he's worrying about the artists do that
worrying in a way that is very unique
and really essential to the process of
designing our futures and this really
became a kind of an important kind of
soap box issue for me about a year ago a
year and a half ago when we were working
with MIT Media Lab we did a residency
program there we put seven storytellers
in the social computing group under the
leadership of sep kambar who's one of
our artists and also the key researcher
at MIT formerly from google and in that
process in one of our initial
conversations he said it's important for
us to bring storytellers into this
process of what does it mean to you know
what is the future of social computing
because code is the new superpower code
creates a social process and that social
process creates our world and when he
said that that really struck me as a
very provocative statement I don't come
from coding I'm a dancer by trade that's
my initial creative art form was dance
then moved into theater and it moved
into direct and creating and kind of
going in that path
intersected with technology when it made
sense because of how technology had
evolved in our culture and how the arts
and storytelling had to evolve with it
but the idea that code is the new
superpower was really concerning in some
ways he talked about things like food
trucks and Twitter and uber and
potential green spaces as kind of ways
of that that code would eventually allow
us to have a different future physiol
physiologically is in terms of industry
in terms of sociological constructs but
for me being a woman of color who's not
part of the technology world
fundamentally didn't come from that
background there was a feeling of
vulnerability to those who design that
code right especially when we know the
statistics are that women and people of
color by far not part of the process of
designing that code and then we put a
woman who is an amazing journalist into
that process and she went around for her
month residency at MIT and just asked
computer scientists one question what is
an algorithm and this is a journalist
who is a Fulbright Scholar you know
she's worked at the LA Times and all
these different prestigious newspapers
and she had this revelation that oh you
know code has its own bias and its own
framing because it's essentially the
programmer asks a question and
constructs the algorithm to answer that
but the way that you construct that
question has its own framing and its own
biases and I was like whoa I hadn't
really considered that as a journalist
she just took what came whatever the
algorithm spit out as data she took it
his truth and as the fundamental object
thing objective thing that she could
build her story on right and so this was
a first part of my okay so it's
important that we know who's making the
code how they're asking the questions so
that the framing just as complicated as
a lens is on journalism or framing and
storytelling and media representation
that's just as complicated as it is is
who's designing that code right so we
have to really think about that from a
critical place then Aaron actually
introduced me to his boss at the time
robert wang and I got a chance to go
spend some time at Google Creative Lab
in New York and Robert was phenomenal I
had an amazing time speaking with him
and then he said something very
provocative to me he said that um
artists are the pairs of artists are
just a pair of hands in the tech
industry it's really run by the nba's
and the engineers and I have an MBA and
I have a BFA so you know love to the
MBAs in the world and the engineers in
the world but he was concerned that
artists were being very much
marginalized inside of the tech world
and knowing how powerful the tech
community is in designing that future
world and now understanding this not
only women and people color that are
marginalized now artists are also
marginalized in that world raise another
flag and I was like oh wow it's really
important for us to think about how
we're creating this convergence between
art and technology and diversifying that
thought so that more people can be part
of constructing what will be our future
and then finally the kind of third piece
of the puzzle was when I was at the
school world forum last year at Oxford
and I was sitting next to the head of a
futurist department at arguably the
number one technology company in the
world and I won't say who he was a
sweetheart of a man and his whole job
was to construct the future office
buildings homes to design what we
imagine the future to be to help set the
strategy for this global really powerful
technology company and when I when he
showed me a 12-minute video of what that
future looked like it was very
impressive it was predominantly white
and Asian but it is so there was like
still that kind of you know that that
gap but the technology was phenomenal
but it was kind of missing something
there was something that wasn't quite
there and when I turned to him I said
wow do you have any artists on your team
and he looked he said oh my god we don't
and I was like well how are you
imagining the future if you don't anyone
from the arts or the humanities
participating in that process and he
goes I never thought about that before
we that's a blind spot you know and so
for me I was like wow that that's kind
of dangerous right
because those blind spots as we know
become very dangerous I don't know if
you got it when I was in my graduate
program in my MBA program we had to do a
case study we had to read a case study
can really analyze the chat the Columbia
because what they found when I did all
of the looking back as to why this
explosion happened they found that it
was those blind spots it was the group
think it was a lack of diversity of
thought because they had such a
stringent structure in place that people
that had a something to say that was a
little bit counter to the main they kind
of got silenced right so now what do we
know the artists do artists are the ones
that don't remain silent right artists
are the ones that are going to call it
out like it is they're going to respond
and react and help us to reveal those
blind spots and so I think well we're
smart people where we we won't we'll
think broader than that we won't allow
our future to kind of head down that
road and then I think about past moments
of our blind spots right so the
Industrial Age was phenomenal for
productivity for efficiency we wouldn't
be where we are now as a society as an
advanced modern society without the
industrial age but yet at the same time
we have films like that came out Josh
foxes film about how to say goodbye to
the earth because of the blind spot that
we may have had 100 years ago as we're
racing towards productivity and
efficiency and maybe not considering
those outliers those marginalized voices
that might have said maybe we should
consider the environment in this race to
productivity and efficiency so I feel
like at this point in time we have a
opportunity to create a critical
intervention and are racing to our
future right now and make sure that we
have the jane jacobs in the world that
countered the Robert Moses is I think we
need Robert Moses we need Jane Jacobs
but we can't we I think the artists
being part and being central to this
technology shift having a story tellers
be central to this technology shift will
allow us to find those blind spots so we
don't lose something like the values of
community and the values of green space
that Jane Jacobs in
serted into that idea of what the modern
New York City was going to be and I
think about artists specifically Scott
snippy was one of Ark is one of our
creative advisors and has been very
inspirational to me he said when he
first got his Apple Computer he saw just
black space and this little cursor and
he saw infinity he saw a possibility he
saw you know this this amazing ability
for anything and everything to happen in
that black space with that little cursor
and then this happened and he said no
they boxed the universe into a desktop
so we're now talking about this idea of
framing and I was at dinner with um at
South by Southwest a couple weeks ago
and they were I was sitting with an AR
company and they were talking about a
are in the future of computing
interfaces and they were like can you
believe we're gonna be able to do emails
like this like why are we doing emails
like this why can't we do sign language
or do a dance tutorials like why do we
have to be constructed than the idea of
bringing back the keyboard that doesn't
exist there right so that's why I think
it's important to have these artists
make sure that we don't put another
desktop as the only way to interface
with what our future is and you know
Scott went on to create the but Bjork
Biophilia app where he said when the
tablet came out when ipad came out the
universe opened back up to him and he
created this beautiful fluid gorgeous
cinematic artistic interface with which
to navigate the data the imagery the
story the song of bjork now just one
last blind spot and I know I'm a little
bit over time here it's really important
for us to consider how we are catalyzing
the future of storytelling specifically
how are we innovating on the art and
form of storytelling specifically
because there because when we have blind
spots around something as powerful as
storytelling it can really create some
serious damage and I grew up with a
father that would always tell me that
reality of man has his thought so
reality of man is his thought and
storytelling is one of the fundamental
ways that we
our thoughts and construct our sense of
what reality is storytelling is probably
one of the most powerful tools of the
human existence for perpetuating are the
advancement of civilization for sharing
our knowledge and for kind of
fundamentally just defining what it
means to be human in the very beginning
of films as a film institution as a film
community we have to bear the burden of
part of our birth story which is that
the very first feature film that ever
existed was also one of the most racist
piece of media that ever existed and
there was a perpetuation of the story of
black men particularly as being the
boogeyman which has all kinds of
political reasons as to why and then the
reality of madness is thought and
stories one of the fundamental ways that
we construct our thoughts and it leads
to even today they redid the doll test
just a few years ago and we're still
trapped in those states local narratives
that have kind of seeded American
consciousness from those old stories
such as the medium of DW Griffith's
Birth of a Nation and they're so
preferring you know so this just one
example of how powerful story is that
how also it can have a counterintuitive
effect and have to lead to even current
day challenges with how we perceive each
other and then you have artists that are
trying to break open all that space
right so this is a project that I was
involved in that actually worked so far
it kind of created this counter tension
against that particular narrative that
particular blind spot and instead of
constructing stereotypical identities
that actually exploded them to create
the sense of breaking open the
monolithic idea of an identity group
we've seen I
virtual reality which the prototype of
the rift was at Sundance in 2012 with a
project called hunger in Los Angeles
that promoted or created such sense of
empathy that came out of there with
tears in their eyes over a man that was
going into a diabetic coma because he
bakes Monsanto store running out of food
we're seeing augmented reality being
used to help us understand the loss of
coral reefs this is another one that
ball with keys that is also connected to
a dome presentation we're seeing virtual
reality being used to help people get a
sense of what does it mean to be in the
perspective of the woman or of the man
and a college party that go through the
scenario of a date rape and and we I had
grown men coming out of this this is
probably the lowest quality art pieces
we've ever showed at Sundance in terms
of production quality but I had grown
men powerful men heads of Studios coming
out with tears in their eyes coming out
of this project because they said oh my
god I gotta go call my daughter or I
gotta go call my son and starting to
understand what the psychological
conditions are that lead to this
particular moment of the epidemic of day
trade we have in our culture same thing
she came back make sure with a police
brutality we're seeing you know the
James James Robert Moses story we're
seeing the immigrant story we're seeing
the idea of the farmers story we're
seeing the idea of weather patterns all
these things that artists what does it
mean to be in the fog of war during a
revolution and having to make moral
political story choices that you can
exhibit you couldn't have that agency
within a 2d film that the gaming
environment is allowing people to
experience in a document reconstruct you
know what does it mean to have the
identity of a black male that is
transgendered
mean to you know kind of understand the
data around dating culture and online
dating and telling us more about what it
means to want to love so I showing you
all these images to say that it's been a
real privilege and honor to be in the
position that we're at a new frontier to
follow these artists into an incredibly
scary unknown space and also trying to
find constantly what is the soul in the
machine how do the Arts and Technology
converge to help us to actually feel
more human and that is way over time